Now let me first clarify
that there could be many
various sources for plays.
Like what I said,
we could get fascinated with a topic
or with a news item, whatever.
It could also begin
with a fascination
for a certain character
and that’s what you
developed into a story,
made a sketch of,
set the tone for, and so on.
Another way is starting
with the genre.
You thought of creating a musical
or horror play, which only a few
can effectively pull off in theaters
because obviously it really needs
some kind of technical wizardry
to get the effect you want.
Or you can also stick
to the traditional.
But in this session,
I want to show you
or want you to know
that the whole tradition
of Philippine theater is vast,
even if our tradition
may not be as old
as Europe or Greece
or any other country.
When we say theater,
we mean theater that is developed
and written by playwrights, by dramatists.
We won’t include
the rituals and folk traditions.
In the Philippines,
we can divide it into two.
It can be categorized
into traditional theater
and modern theater.
Traditional theater still exists today
and is still prevalent
wherever you go in the country.
The tradition to stage
passion plays during Holy Week,
the tradition of panunuluyan,
all the religious plays and playlets,
and performance practices
are still widespread.
Even today, comedies and sarsuwelas
are still staged on theaters.
Of course, these all developed
and some have done studies about these forms.
It’s good for you to know
the history of theater
in the Philippines,
which playwrights took part in.
The history of theater in the Philippines
faced a lot of obstacles.
What I always take note of
is that there’s a particular divide.
It’s not a very hostile divide.
Except that in the practice
of traditional theater
and modern contemporary theater,
sometimes it overlaps,
but it’s not that big.
When I say the traditional
theater practice,
I don’t only mean the writing of it,
I don’t only mean the aesthetic of it.
But also the organizing of it.
I’m talking about the still existing
passion play, comedy,
and all the other theater forms
taught by Nic Tiongson
on his survey of Philippine theater.
They still do exist.
While the roots come from
the Spanish era and the American era,
you can still see it
in the provinces.
It’s a community event
that people in the community expect
as part of the whole festivity.
It’s actually closer to a ritual,
as if “It’s not a festival without it.”
The Holy Week experience
is incomplete
if you don’t watch how Jesus
marched and died on the cross.
You need to watch
the Passion of Christ.
It’s tradition,
and the system is relatively closed.
I haven’t heard anyone
promoting these
on social media
or advertising these for tickets.
It’s not on TicketWorld.
You only know that it exists,
and if you go there, it’s still there.
That’s the whole thing.
It’s a system on its own,
it’s a theater practice on its own.
And it’s thriving.
The other category is modern theater,
which isn't dependent on the calendar,
like the religious calendar or festivals.
And it’s not the repetitive kind of play.
In modern theater,
there’s an effect or influence of,
let’s say, economy.
You need to sell it,
you need to market it,
you need to advertise it
to have an audience.
It may be a simple advertisement
of you whispering to people
or inviting everyone via Facebook.
The market has become
more important.
The community or what we call
audience that we develop is more important
because it’s dependent
on ticket sales and so on.
Although, relatively, that practice
is still not that entrenched
because most of the
contemporary theater companies
are still relying
on schools as audience.
And when you say
school as audience,
there’s a hint
that you’re a patron
since you’ll have to
convince the principal
to require their students
to watch by bus loads.
When people hear there’s a good play,
they anticipate it.
That’s the ideal condition.
The theater thrives
because of the constant support
of the customer base.
That’s why some theater companies
change their priorities.
For example,
in programming their season,
there has to be a musical
because your show might flop.
Just showing straight plays might not sell.
So there’s a clash right?
It’s difficult to sell straight plays
because it’s dialogue-heavy,
especially if there are
only two characters.
How will you be able to sell it?
That’s why we hire famous actors.
There are constraints
you’ll have to consider,
how to put your play on stage.
These are the practical things
that you also have to face.
Second, most of the topics
are usually the writers' concerns.
That’s you.
If you want to write a new play.
There’s also an area,
another layer of contemporary theater
where you are able to experiment
or push the limits away
from the demands of market forces
and from the audience’s expectations.
Most of the time,
I think this is the more exciting arena
especially for playwrights.
Why?
Because they’re able
to create other forms,
you aren’t constrained
to just musicals,
you aren't constrained to just
hiring known actors only.
I guess it would be the same...
mentality of the so-called
indie film community.
There’s a space for that
in contemporary Philippine theater.
I guess, that’s one of
the things we encourage
because it breaks new ground,
style-wise, form-wise, and so on.
And then when it hits,
it gets picked up
by the more commercially-oriented
theater companies,
because it became a hit.
I’m not saying that when it’s modern
it shouldn’t use the traditional form.
In fact, there was a time
when modern playwrights
used the elements
of traditional forms.
They had new interpretations
of the sarsuwela, passion play, and panunuluyan.
For example, Aurelio Tolentino
wrote a new interpretation of Christ.
These are the different ways
of how playwrights do it
here in the Philippines.
And the modern tradition still exists
despite the growth of the traditional,
for example, in the field of cinema,
which is often compared to theater.
You can start there.
You want to produce a musical
because you’re a performer, and so on.
Or you could produce
a play without songs
where there’s just a situation
where the characters simply talk.
It’s okay whatever genre you choose.
That’s one category.
There’s a huge effect
if you have a variety of options
of different plays
that you can read or watch.